Network Working Group       J. Oikarinen

Request for Comments: 1459  D. Reed

May 1993

# Internet Relay Chat Protocol

## Status of This Memo
This memo defines an Experimental Protocol for the Internet community. Discussion and suggestions for improvement are requested.  Please refer to the current edition of the "IAB Official Protocol Standards" for the standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution of this memo is unlimited.

## Abstract
The IRC protocol was developed over the last 4 years since it was first implemented as a means for users on a BBS to chat amongst themselves. Now it supports a world-wide network of servers and clients, and is stringing to cope with growth. Over the past 2 years, the average number of users connected to the main IRC network has grown by a factor of 10.

The IRC protocol is a text-based protocol, with the simplest client being any socket program capable of connecting to the server.

<details>
<summary>Table of Contents</summary>

- [1. INTRODUCTION](#1-introduction)
  * [1.1 Servers](#11-servers)
  * [1.2 Clients](#12-clients)
    + [1.2.1 Operators](#121-operators)
  * [1.3 Channels](#13-channels)
    + [1.3.1 Channel Operators](#131-channel-operators)
- [2. The IRC Specification](#2-the-irc-specification)
  * [2.1 Overview](#21-overview)
  * [2.2 Character codes](#22-character-codes)
  * [2.3 Messages](#23-messages)
    + [2.3.1 Message format in ’pseudo’ BNF](#231-message-format-in-pseudo-bnf)
  * [2.4 Numeric replies](#24-numeric-replies)
- [3. IRC Concepts.](#3-irc-concepts)
  * [3.1 One-to-one communication](#31-one-to-one-communication)
  * [3.2 One-to-many](#32-one-to-many)
    + [3.2.1 To a list](#321-to-a-list)
    + [3.2.2 To a group (channel)](#322-to-a-group-channel)
    + [3.2.3 To a host/server mask](#323-to-a-hostserver-mask)
  * [3.3 One-to-all](#33-one-to-all)
    + [3.3.1 Client-to-Client](#331-client-to-client)
    + [3.3.2 Client-to-Server](#332-client-to-server)
    + [3.3.3 Server-to-Server.](#333-server-to-server)
- [4. MESSAGE DETAILS](#4-message-details)
  * [4.1 Connection Registration](#41-connection-registration)
    + [4.1.1 Password message](#411-password-message)
    + [4.1.2 Nickname message](#412-nickname-message)
    + [4.1.3 User message](#413-user-message)
    + [4.1.4 Server message](#414-server-message)
    + [4.1.5 Oper](#415-oper)
    + [4.1.6 Quit message](#416-quit-message)
    + [4.1.7 Server Quit message](#417-server-quit-message)

</details>

## 1. INTRODUCTION
The IRC (Internet Relay Chat) protocol has been designed over a number of years for use with text based conferencing. This document describes the current IRC protocol.

The IRC protocol has been developed on systems using the TCP/IP network protocol, although there is no requirement that this remain the only sphere in which it operates.

IRC itself is a teleconferencing system, which (through the use of the client-server model) is well-suited to running on many machines in a distributed fashion. A typical setup involves a single process (the server) forming a central point for clients (or other servers) to connect to, performing the required message delivery/multiplexing and other functions.

### 1.1 Servers
The server forms the backbone of IRC, providing a point to which clients may connect to to talk to each other, and a point for other servers to connect to, forming an IRC network. The only network configuration allowed for IRC servers is that of a spanning tree [see Fig. 1] where each server acts as a central node for the rest of the net it sees.

```
             [ Server 15 ]   [ Server 13 ]      [ Server 14]
                 /                 \                /
                /                   \              /
        [ Server 11 ] ------ [ Server 1 ]    [ Server 12]
                              /        \        /
                             /          \      /
                  [ Server 2 ]        [ Server 3 ]
                    /       \                   \
                   /         \                   \
           [ Server 4 ]    [ Server 5 ]      [ Server 6 ]
            /    |   \                         /
           /     |    \                       /
          /      |     \____                 /
         /       |          \               /
[ Server 7 ] [ Server 8 ] [ Server 9 ] [ Server 10 ]
                                :
                             [ etc. ]
                                :
               [ Fig. 1. Format of IRC server network ]
```

### 1.2 Clients
A client is anything connecting to a server that is not another server. Each client is distinguished from other clients by a unique nickname having a maximum length of nine (9) characters. See the protocol grammar rules for what may and may not be used in a nickname. In addition to the nickname, all servers must have the following information about all clients: the real name of the host that the client is running on, the username of the client on that host, and the server to which the client is connected.

#### 1.2.1 Operators
To allow a reasonable amount of order to be kept within the IRC network, a special class of clients (operators) is allowed to perform general maintenance functions on the network. Although the powers granted to an operator can be considered as ’dangerous’, they are nonetheless required. Operators should be able to perform basic network tasks such as disconnecting and reconnecting servers as needed to prevent long-term use of bad network routing. In recognition of this need, the protocol discussed herein provides for operators only to be able to perform such functions. See sections 4.1.7 (SQUIT) and 4.3.5 (CONNECT).

A more controversial power of operators is the ability to remove a user from the connected network by ’force’, i.e. operators are able to close the connection between any client and server. The justification for this is delicate since its abuse is both destructive and annoying. For further details on this type of action, see section 4.6.1 (KILL).

### 1.3 Channels
A channel is a named group of one or more clients which will all receive messages addressed to that channel. The channel is created implicitly when the first client joins it, and the channel ceases to exist when the last client leaves it. While channel exists, any client can reference the channel using the name of the channel.

Channels names are strings (beginning with a ’&’ or ’#’ character) of length up to 200 characters. Apart from the the requirement that the first character being either ’&’ or ’#’; the only restriction on a channel name is that it may not contain any spaces (’ ’), a control G (^G or ASCII 7), or a comma (’,’ which is used as a list item separator by the protocol).

There are two types of channels allowed by this protocol. One is a distributed channel which is known to all the servers that are connected to the network. These channels are marked by the first character being a only clients on the server where it exists may join it. These are distinguished by a leading ’&’ character. On top of these two types, there are the various channel modes available to alter the characteristics of individual channels. See section 4.2.3 (MODE command) for more details on this.

To create a new channel or become part of an existing channel, a user is required to JOIN the channel. If the channel doesn’t exist prior to joining, the channel is created and the creating user becomes a channel operator. If the channel already exists, whether or not your request to JOIN that channel is honoured depends on the current modes of the channel. For example, if the channel is invite-only, (+i), then you may only join if invited. As part of the protocol, a user may be a part of several channels at once, but a limit of ten (10) channels is recommended as being ample for both experienced and novice users. See section 8.13 for more information on this.

If the IRC network becomes disjoint because of a split between two servers, the channel on each side is only composed of those clients which are connected to servers on the respective sides of the split, possibly ceasing to exist on one side of the split. When the split is healed, the connecting servers announce to each other who they think is in each channel and the mode of that channel. If the channel exists on both sides, the JOINs and MODEs are interpreted in an inclusive manner so that both sides of the new connection will agree about which clients are in the channel and what modes the channel has.

#### 1.3.1 Channel Operators
The channel operator (also referred to as a "chop" or "chanop") on a given channel is considered to ’own’ that channel. In recognition of this status, channel operators are endowed with certain powers which enable them to keep control and some sort of sanity in their channel.  As an owner of a channel, a channel operator is not required to have reasons for their actions, although if their actions are generally antisocial or otherwise abusive, it might be reasonable to ask an IRC operator to intervene, or for the usersjust leave and go elsewhere and form their own channel.

The commands which may only be used by channel operators are:

    KICK - Eject a client from the channel
    MODE - Change the channel’s mode
    INVITE - Invite a client to an invite-only channel (mode +i)
    TOPIC - Change the channel topic in a mode +t channel

A channel operator is identified by the ’@’ symbol next to their nickname whenever it is associated with a channel (ie replies to the NAMES, WHO and WHOIS commands).

## 2. The IRC Specification
### 2.1 Overview
The protocol as described herein is for use both with server to server and client to server connections. There are, however, more restrictions on client connections (which are considered to be untrustworthy) than on server connections.

### 2.2 Character codes
No specific character set is specified. The protocol is based on a a set of codes which are composed of eight (8) bits, making up an octet. Each message may be composed of any number of these octets; however, some octet values are used for control codes which act as message delimiters.

Regardless of being an 8-bit protocol, the delimiters and keywords are such that protocol is mostly usable from USASCII terminal and a telnet connection.

Because of IRC’s scandanavian origin, the characters {}| are considered to be the lower case equivalents of the characters [], respectively. This is a critical issue when determining the equivalence of two nicknames.

### 2.3 Messages
Servers and clients send eachother messages which may or may not generate a reply. If the message contains a valid command, as described in later sections, the client should expect a reply as specified but it is not advised to wait forever for the reply; client to server and server to server communication is essentially asynchronous in nature.

Each IRC message may consist of up to three main parts: the prefix (optional), the command, and the command parameters (of which there may be up to 15). The prefix, command, and all parameters are separated by one (or more) ASCII space character(s) (0x20).

The presence of a prefix is indicated with a single leading ASCII colon character (’:’, 0x3b), which must be the first character of the message itself. There must be no gap (whitespace) between the colon and the prefix. The prefix is used by servers to indicate the true

origin of the message. If the prefix is missing from the message, it is assumed to have originated from the connection from which it was received. Clients should not use prefix when sending a message from themselves; if they use a prefix, the only valid prefix is the registered nickname associated with the client. If the source identified by the prefix cannot be found from the server’s internal database, or if the source is registered from a different link than from which the message arrived, the server must ignore the message silently.

The command must either be a valid IRC command or a three (3) digit number represented in ASCII text.

IRC messages are always lines of characters terminated with a CR-LF (Carriage Return - Line Feed) pair, and these messages shall not exceed 512 characters in length, counting all characters including the trailing CR-LF. Thus, there are 510 characters maximum allowed for the command and its parameters. There is no provision for continuation message lines. See section 7 for more details about current implementations.

#### 2.3.1 Message format in ’pseudo’ BNF
The protocol messages must be extracted from the contiguous stream of octets. The current solution is to designate two characters, CR and LF, as message separators. Empty messages are silently ignored, which permits use of the sequence CR-LF between messages without extra problems.

The extracted message is parsed into the components \<prefix\>, \<command\> and list of parameters matched either by \<middle\> or \<trailing\> components.

The BNF representation for this is:
```
<message>  ::= [’:’ <prefix> <SPACE> ] <command> <params> <crlf>
<prefix>   ::= <servername> | <nick> [ ’!’ <user> ] [ ’@’ <host> ]
<command>  ::= <letter> { <letter> } | <number> <number> <number>
<SPACE>    ::= ’ ’ { ’ ’ }
<params>   ::= <SPACE> [ ’:’ <trailing> | <middle> <params> ]
<middle>   ::= <Any *non-empty* sequence of octets not including SPACE or NUL or CR or LF, the first of which may not be ’:’>
<trailing> ::= <Any, possibly *empty*, sequence of octets not including NUL or CR or LF>
<crlf>     ::= CR LF
```

NOTES:
 1) \<SPACE\> is consists only of SPACE character(s) (0x20).  Specially notice that TABULATION, and all other control characters are considered NON-WHITE-SPACE.
 2) After extracting the parameter list, all parameters are equal, whether matched by \<middle\> or \<trailing\>. \<Trailing\> is just a syntactic trick to allow SPACE within parameter.
 3) The fact that CR and LF cannot appear in parameter strings is just artifact of the message framing. This might change later.
 4) The NUL character is not special in message framing, and basically could end up inside a parameter, but as it would cause extra complexities in normal C string handling. Therefore NUL is not allowed within messages.
 5) The last parameter may be an empty string.
 6) Use of the extended prefix ([’!’ \<user\> ] [’@’ \<host\> ]) must not be used in server to server communications and is only intended for server to client messages in order to provide clients with more useful information about who a message is from without the need for additional queries.

Most protocol messages specify additional semantics and syntax for the extracted parameter strings dictated by their position in the list. For example, many server commands will assume that the first parameter after the command is the list of targets, which can be described with:
```
<target>     ::= <to> [ "," <target> ]
<to>         ::= <channel> | <user> ’@’ <servername> | <nick> | <mask>
<channel>    ::= (’#’ | ’&’) <chstring>
<servername> ::= <host>
<host>       ::= see RFC 952 [DNS:4] for details on allowed hostnames
<nick>       ::= <letter> { <letter> | <number> | <special> }
<mask>       ::= (’#’ | ’$’) <chstring>
<chstring>   ::= <any 8bit code except SPACE, BELL, NUL, CR, LF and comma (’,’)>
```
Other parameter syntaxes are:
```
<user>     ::= <nonwhite> { <nonwhite> }
<letter>   ::= ’a’ ... ’z’ | ’A’ ... ’Z’
<number>   ::= ’0’ ... ’9’
<special>  ::= ’-’ | ’[’ | ’]’ | ’\’ | ’‘’ | ’^’ | ’{’ | ’}’
<nonwhite> ::= <any 8bit code except SPACE (0x20), NUL (0x0), CR (0xd), and LF (0xa)>
```

### 2.4 Numeric replies
Most of the messages sent to the server generate a reply of some sort. The most common reply is the numeric reply, used for both errors and normal replies. The numeric reply must be sent as one message consisting of the sender prefix, the three digit numeric, and the target of the reply. A numeric reply is not allowed to originate from a client; any such messages received by a server are silently dropped. In all other respects, a numeric reply is just like a normal message, except that the keyword is made up of 3 numeric digits rather than a string of letters. A list of different replies is supplied in section 6.

## 3. IRC Concepts.
This section is devoted to describing the actual concepts behind the organization of the IRC protocol and how the current implementations deliver different classes of messages.

```
    1--\
        A        D---4
    2--/ \      /
          B----C
         /      \
        3        E
 Servers: A, B, C, D, E Clients: 1, 2, 3, 4
 [ Fig. 2. Sample small IRC network ]
```

### 3.1 One-to-one communication
Communication on a one-to-one basis is usually only performed by clients, since most server-server traffic is not a result of servers talking only to each other. To provide a secure means for clients to talk to each other, it is required that all servers be able to send a message in exactly one direction along the spanning tree in order to reach any client. The path of a message being delivered is the shortest path between any two points on the spanning tree.

The following examples all refer to Figure 2 above.

Example 1:
A message between clients 1 and 2 is only seen by server A, which sends it straight to client 2.

Example 2:
A message between clients 1 and 3 is seen by servers A & B, and client 3. No other clients or servers are allowed see the message.

Example 3:
A message between clients 2 and 4 is seen by servers A, B, C & D and client 4 only.

### 3.2 One-to-many
The main goal of IRC is to provide a forum which allows easy and efficient conferencing (one to many conversations). IRC offers several means to achieve this, each serving its own purpose.

#### 3.2.1 To a list
The least efficient style of one-to-many conversation is through clients talking to a ’list’ of users. How this is done is almost self explanatory: the client gives a list of destinations to which the message is to be delivered and the server breaks it up and dispatches a separate copy of the message to each given destination.  This isn’t as efficient as using a group since the destination list is broken up and the dispatch sent without checking to make sure duplicates aren’t sent down each path.

#### 3.2.2 To a group (channel)
In IRC the channel has a role equivalent to that of the multicast group; their existence is dynamic (coming and going as people join and leave channels) and the actual conversation carried out on a channel is only sent to servers which are supporting users on a given channel. If there are multiple users on a server in the same channel, the message text is sent only once to that server and then sent to each client on the channel. This action is then repeated for each client-server combination until the original message has fanned out and reached each member of the channel.

The following examples all refer to Figure 2.

Example 4:
Any channel with 1 client in it. Messages to the channel go to the server and then nowhere else.

Example 5:
2 clients in a channel. All messages traverse a path as if they were private messages between the two clients outside a channel.

Example 6:
Clients 1, 2 and 3 in a channel. All messages to the channel are sent to all clients and only those servers which must be traversed by the message if it were a private message to a single client. If client 1 sends a message, it goes back to client 2 and then via server B to client 3.

#### 3.2.3 To a host/server mask
To provide IRC operators with some mechanism to send messages to a large body of related users, host and server mask messages are provided. These messages are sent to users whose host or server information match that of the mask. The messages are only sent to locations where users are, in a fashion similar to that of channels.

### 3.3 One-to-all
The one-to-all type of message is better described as a broadcast message, sent to all clients or servers or both. On a large network of users and servers, a single message can result in a lot of traffic being sent over the network in an effort to reach all of the desired destinations.

For some messages, there is no option but to broadcast it to all servers so that the state information held by each server is reasonably consistent between servers.

#### 3.3.1 Client-to-Client
There is no class of message which, from a single message, results in a message being sent to every other client.

#### 3.3.2 Client-to-Server
Most of the commands which result in a change of state information (such as channel membership, channel mode, user status, etc) must be sent to all servers by default, and this distribution may not be changed by the client.

#### 3.3.3 Server-to-Server.
While most messages between servers are distributed to all ’other’ servers, this is only required for any message that affects either a user, channel or server. Since these are the basic items found in

IRC, nearly all messages originating from a server are broadcast to all other connected servers.

## 4. MESSAGE DETAILS
On the following pages are descriptions of each message recognized by the IRC server and client. All commands described in this section must be implemented by any server for this protocol.

Where the reply ERR_NOSUCHSERVER is listed, it means that the parameter could not be found. The server must not send any other replies after this for that command.

The server to which a client is connected is required to parse the complete message, returning any appropriate errors. If the server encounters a fatal error while parsing a message, an error must be sent back to the client and the parsing terminated. A fatal error may be considered to be incorrect command, a destination which is otherwise unknown to the server (server, nick or channel names fit this category), not enough parameters or incorrect privileges.

If a full set of parameters is presented, then each must be checked for validity and appropriate responses sent back to the client. In the case of messages which use parameter lists using the comma as an item separator, a reply must be sent for each item.

In the examples below, some messages appear using the full format:

:Name COMMAND parameter list

Such examples represent a message from "Name" in transit between servers, where it is essential to include the name of the original sender of the message so remote servers may send back a reply along the correct path.

### 4.1 Connection Registration
The commands described here are used to register a connection with an IRC server as either a user or a server as well as correctly disconnect.

A "PASS" command is not required for either client or server connection to be registered, but it must precede the server message or the latter of the NICK/USER combination. It is strongly recommended that all server connections have a password in order to give some level of security to the actual connections. The recommended order for a client to register is as follows:

1. Pass message
2. Nick message
3. User message

#### 4.1.1 Password message
```
Command:    PASS
Parameters: <password>
```
The PASS command is used to set a ’connection password’. The password can and must be set before any attempt to register the connection is made. Currently this requires that clients send a PASS command before sending the NICK/USER combination and servers *must* send a PASS command before any SERVER command. The password supplied must match the one contained in the C/N lines (for servers) or I lines (for clients). It is possible to send multiple PASS commands before registering but only the last one sent is used for verification and it may not be changed once registered.

Numeric Replies:
```
    ERR_NEEDMOREPARAMS    ERR_ALREADYREGISTRED
```

Example:
```
    PASS secretpasswordhere
```

#### 4.1.2 Nickname message
```
   Command: NICK
Parameters: <nickname> [ <hopcount> ]
```

NICK message is used to give user a nickname or change the previous one. The parameter is only used by servers to indicate how far away a nick is from its home server. A local connection has a hopcount of 0. If supplied by a client, it must be ignored.

If a NICK message arrives at a server which already knows about an identical nickname for another client, a nickname collision occurs.  As a result of a nickname collision, all instances of the nickname are removed from the server’s database, and a KILL command is issued to remove the nickname from all other server’s database. If the NICK message causing the collision was a nickname change, then the original (old) nick must be removed as well.

If the server recieves an identical NICK from a client which is directly connected, it may issue an ERR_NICKCOLLISION to the local client, drop the NICK command, and not generate any kills.

Numeric Replies:
```
    ERR_NONICKNAMEGIVEN   ERR_ERRONEUSNICKNAME
    ERR_NICKNAMEINUSE     ERR_NICKCOLLISION
```

Example:
```
NICK Wiz           ; Introducing new nick "Wiz".
:WiZ NICK Kilroy   ; WiZ changed his nickname to Kilroy.
```

#### 4.1.3 User message
```
Command:    USER
Parameters: <username> <hostname> <servername> <realname>
```

The USER message is used at the beginning of connection to specify the username, hostname, servername and realname of s new user. It is also used in communication between servers to indicate new user arriving on IRC, since only after both USER and NICK have been received from a client does a user become registered.

Between servers USER must to be prefixed with client’s NICKname.  Note that hostname and servername are normally ignored by the IRC server when the USER command comes from a directly connected client (for security reasons), but they are used in server to server communication. This means that a NICK must always be sent to a remote server when a new user is being introduced to the rest of the network before the accompanying USER is sent.

It must be noted that realname parameter must be the last parameter, because it may contain space characters and must be prefixed with a colon (’:’) to make sure this is recognised as such.

Since it is easy for a client to lie about its username by relying solely on the USER message, the use of an "Identity Server" is recommended. If the host which a user connects from has such a server enabled the username is set to that as in the reply from the "Identity Server".

Numeric Replies:
```
    ERR_NEEDMOREPARAMS    ERR_ALREADYREGISTRED
```

Examples:
```
USER guest tolmoon tolsun :Ronnie Reagan
                   ; User registering themselves with a username of "guest" and real name "Ronnie Reagan".

:testnick USER guest tolmoon tolsun :Ronnie Reagan
                   ; message between servers with the nickname for which the USER command belongs to
```

#### 4.1.4 Server message
```
   Command: SERVER
Parameters: <user> <password>
```

The server message is used to tell a server that the other end of a new connection is a server. This message is also used to pass server data over whole net. When a new server is connected to net, information about it be broadcast to the whole network. \<hopcount\> is used to give all servers some internal information on how far away all servers are. With a full server list, it would be possible to construct a map of the entire server tree, but hostmasks prevent this from being done.

The SERVER message must only be accepted from either (a) a connection which is yet to be registered and is attempting to register as a server, or (b) an existing connection to another server, in which case the SERVER message is introducing a new server behind that server.

Most errors that occur with the receipt of a SERVER command result in the connection being terminated by the destination host (target SERVER). Error replies are usually sent using the "ERROR" command rather than the numeric since the ERROR command has several useful properties which make it useful here.

If a SERVER message is parsed and attempts to introduce a server which is already known to the receiving server, the connection from which that message must be closed (following the correct procedures), since a duplicate route to a server has formed and the acyclic nature of the IRC tree broken.

Numeric Replies:
```
    ERR_ALREADYREGISTRED
```

Example:
```
SERVER test.oulu.fi 1 :[tolsun.oulu.fi] Experimental server
                   ; New server test.oulu.fi introducing itself and attempting to register. The name in []’s is the hostname for the host running test.oulu.fi.

:tolsun.oulu.fi SERVER csd.bu.edu 5 :BU Central Server
                   ; Server tolsun.oulu.fi is our uplink for csd.bu.edu which is 5 hops away.
```

#### 4.1.5 Oper
```
   Command: OPER
Parameters: <user> <password>
```

OPER message is used by a normal user to obtain operator privileges.  The combination of \<user\> and \<password\> are required to gain Operator privileges.

If the client sending the OPER command supplies the correct password for the given user, the server then informs the rest of the network of the new operator by issuing a "MODE +o" for the clients nickname.

The OPER message is client-server only.

Numeric Replies:
```
    ERR_NEEDMOREPARAMS    RPL_YOUREOPER
    ERR_NOOPERHOST        ERR_PASSWDMISMATCH
```

Example:
```
OPER foo bar       ; Attempt to register as an operator using a username of "foo" and "bar" as the password.
```

#### 4.1.6 Quit message
```
   Command: QUIT
Parameters: [<Quit message>]
```

A client session is ended with a quit message. The server must close the connection to a client which sends a QUIT message. If a "Quit Message" is given, this will be sent instead of the default message, the nickname.

When netsplits (disconnecting of two servers) occur, the quit message is composed of the names of two servers involved, separated by a space. The first name is that of the server which is still connected and the second name is that of the server that has become disconnected.

If, for some other reason, a client connection is closed without the client issuing a QUIT command (e.g. client dies and EOF occurs on socket), the server is required to fill in the quit message with some sort of message reflecting the nature of the event which caused it to happen.

Numeric Replies:
```
    None.
```

Examples:
```
QUIT :Gone to have lunch   ; Preferred message format.
```

#### 4.1.7 Server Quit message
```
   Command: SQUIT
Parameters: <server> <comment>
```

The SQUIT message is needed to tell about quitting or dead servers.  If a server wishes to break the connection to another server it must send a SQUIT message to the other server, using the the name of the other server as the server parameter, which then closes its connection to the quitting server.

This command is also available operators to help keep a network of IRC servers connected in an orderly fashion. Operators may also issue an SQUIT message for a remote server connection. In this case, the SQUIT must be parsed by each server inbetween the operator and the remote server, updating the view of the network held by each server as explained below.

The \<comment\> should be supplied by all operators who execute a SQUIT for a remote server (that is not connected to the server they are currently on) so that other operators are aware for the reason of this action. The \<comment\> is also filled in by servers which may place an error or similar message here.

Both of the servers which are on either side of the connection being closed are required to to send out a SQUIT message (to all its other server connections) for all other servers which are considered to be behind that link.

Similarly, a QUIT message must be sent to the other connected servers rest of the network on behalf of all clients behind that link. In addition to this, all channel members of a channel which lost a member due to the split must be sent a QUIT message.

If a server connection is terminated prematurely (e.g. the server on the other end of the link died), the server which detects this disconnection is required to inform the rest of the network that the connection has closed and fill in the comment field with something appropriate.

Numeric replies:
```
    ERR_NOPRIVILEGES    ERR_NOSUCHSERVER
```

Example:
```
SQUIT tolsun.oulu.fi :Bad Link?  ; the server link tolson.oulu.fi has been terminated because of "Bad Link".

:Trillian SQUIT cm22.eng.umd.edu :Server out of control
                                 ; message from Trillian to disconnect "cm22.eng.umd.edu" from the net because "Server out of control".
```
